OME Java Library
================

This package contains several useful core libraries for creating an
OME-compliant Java application.  Using the libraries is as simple as
adding the ome-java-[version].jar file to your classpath.


Contents
--------

The library is broken down into three major components:

- Data service classes (org.openmicroscopy.ds.*)
- Image server classes (org.openmicroscopy.is.*)
- OME-XML classes (org.openmicroscopy.xml.*)

The data service provides a series of Java interfaces to represent
each of the basic data types defined by OME.  (An logical overview of
these types is at http://docs.openmicroscopy.org.uk/concepts/ .)
Included in this are a set of interfaces for the standard OME semantic
types, along with a tool for automatically generating custom
interfaces for custom semantic types.  There is also a generic
Attribute interface for handling data whose semantic type is not known
at compile time.  These interfaces can be used as part of a Java data
model for applications which work with OME data.

The data service also contains classes for connecting to an OME data
server.  These classes range in complexity, and handle many of the
lower-level operations necessary for working with OME data in
conjunction with a data server.

All of these classes are provided as "data services", which are
automatically instantiated as needed.  The DataServices class acts as
a generalized factory for all of these service classes.  New service
classes are easy to write; they just need to implement the DataService
interface.  The DataServices factory will then be able to seamlessly
work with the new service.

The other portion of this library provides access to OME image
servers.  A very low-level interface (ImageServer) is provided to make
direct OMEIS method calls.  Most application writers, however, will
use the higher-level PixelsFactory class (which is implemented as a
data service) to make these calls in terms of the appropriate OME
semantic types (Pixels and OriginalFile).

The OME-XML classes provide easier manipulation of an XML DOM in
memory by wrapping each DOM element in the corresponding node type.
Each node type implements the corresponding Java interface defined in
the org.openmicroscopy.ds.* packages.


Requirements
------------

The OME Java library requires version 1.4 of the JDK.  Certain classes
in the library also have dependencies on other Java libraries:

   - Image server access requires the Apache HTTP client library.
   - Data server access requires the Apache XML-RPC client library.

JAR files for all of these requirements are included in the
distribution, so they can all be placed into your classpath as
necessary.  The OME library JAR file also contains a manifest entry
encoding these dependencies.


License
-------

The OME Java libraries are distributed under the GNU Lesser General
Public License (LGPL).  More information can be found in the LICENSE
file.
